“THE most delightful thing about our engagement is
that everybody is so pleased with it.” Amy Townsend said this,
smiling down at her lover, who, full length on the grass beside
her, leaned on his elbow, watching her soft hair blowing across her
forehead, and the color of the sun flickering through the shadows,
hot on her cheek; for she had closed her fluffy white parasol and
taken off her hat here under an oak-tree on the grassy bank of the
river.

“I should have thought that the fact that we were pleased ourselves
was a trifle more important,” he suggested. But Miss Townsend paid
no attention to his interruption.

“You know, generally, when people get engaged, there are always
people who exclaim: either the man is too good for the girl (and
you are too good for me, Billy!), or the girl is too good for the
man”

“She is; there is no question about that,” the man interrupted.

“Be quiet!” the other commanded. “But in our case, everybody
approves. You see, in the first place, you are a Parson, and I’m a
Worker. That’s what they call me,--the old ladies,--‘a Worker.’ And
of course that’s a most appropriate combination to start with.”

“Well, the old ladies will discover that my wife isn’t going to
run their committees for them,” the parson said emphatically.
“Besides, if I’m a Parson, you’re a Person! How do the old ladies
bear it, that I haven’t any ancestors, and used to run errands in a
tin-shop? _I_’m a Worker, literally enough.”

“You are a goose!” she told him calmly. “Don’t keep interrupting
me, Billy. What do ancestors amount to? I admit I’m glad that none
of mine were hanged (so far as I know), or that they didn’t run off
with other people’s money--or wives. (I’d mind the wives less than
the money, I must confess. I suppose you think that’s very mediæval
in me?) But what credit is their good behavior to me? You are a
credit to your people, whoever they were; and my own belief is that
they were Princes!”

She had such a charming way of flinging up her head and looking
down at him sidewise, that he was willing to have had any kind of
ancestors, only to catch that look of joyous pride; and in his own
joyousness he was impelled to try to take her hand in his: but her
fingers were laced about her knee, and she shook her head.

“Stop! I’m talking seriously; you mustn’t be silly. You must
listen to the other reasons why we are approved of: First, you
are a Parson, and I’m a Worker. Secondly, you are forty-two,
and ‘it’s high time’--high time, sir!--‘for you to be married’;
and I’m twenty-seven--and, really, you know, ‘my chances are
lessening’--(that’s what they say, my dear); and I ‘hardly deserve,
after all these years’”--

“And offers?” suggested her lover.

“After all these _years_, Billy,--not to get a crooked stick in the
end.”

“I am not crooked, I will admit,” he said.

“Thirdly,” she proceeded, “you are very good-looking, and all the
old Tabbies say that a handsome minister ought to be married.”

“The old Tabbies might find something better to talk about,” he
said, his face hardening. “Oh, Amy, that’s the kind of thing
that makes a man cringe!--I mean a minister. Here is this great,
serious, strenuous matter of living--the consciousness of God;
that’s what living is in its highest expression. And to further
that consciousness is the divinest human passion. A man tries to do
it, gives his life to it, and immediately he is food for chattering
old women! They gossip about his affairs, or his clothes, or his
looks, even!” William West sat up, his face stirred with anger and
pity. “But I suppose I must admit that the Parsons bring it on
themselves to some extent,” he ended, with a sigh; “we don’t mingle
enough with men; they distrust us, and think we talk twaddle about
overcoming temptations we know nothing about. So, being shut out
from masculine living, we do haunt tea-tables, and gabble about
vestments. I suppose there’s no doubt of it. Amy, I believe that
the old hunting, swearing parsons of three generations ago were of
more real value in the world than the harmless creatures that we
have now!”

He had a certain stern way of thrusting out his lower lip when he
was very much in earnest, and drawing his strong brows together; an
impatient fire sprang into his beautiful dark eyes. He turned and
looked at her, claiming her understanding.

“Yes,” she said; “yes, it is so. The belittling of the profession
of the ministry is a dreadful thing--a shameful thing. I once
heard a man say that ‘Elderly unmarried women always had to have
something to fuss over and coddle, something to lead around by
a blue ribbon. Sometimes it was a poodle; sometimes it was a
clergyman.’ And there’s truth in it, Billy.”

“There is,” he said grimly.

“Well, dear,” she reassured him, smiling, “your distinguished
rudeness to the ladies of your congregation has at least protected
you from the blue ribbon.”

He began to protest, but the talk slipped back into their own
affairs, and somehow he succeeded in getting her hand, and by and
by they were silent, just for happiness, and because it was sunset,
and the river was flickering with light, and there was a faint stir
of leaves overhead. They were to be married in a fortnight, and
they were going to have all their lives together to say how good
life was, so there was no need to talk now.

As the girl had said, it really was a very satisfactory match.
William West was a man whom every one honored, and many loved.
For fifteen years he had been settled in Mercer; first as an
assistant to old Mr. Brown, and then as rector of the church.
But he had taken his place in the community as a man of strong
judgment and high character; perhaps as a citizen, rather than as
a minister. Men felt that he was a man before he was a clergyman;
not knowing that his calling had given him his highest manhood. He
was singularly devoid of clerical affectation; consequently the
influence of his own reverence was not vitiated by a suspicion of
his common sense. In fact, his sanity in matters religious, joined
to his knowledge of human nature, made him a man of importance in
affairs municipal and social. That he had lived to be forty-two,
and had not married, was from no asceticism; he was a very human
person, and fully intended to have a wife; only, she must be just
what he wanted. And so far, that “not impossible She” who was to
possess his heart had never appeared. When she did, he recognized
her immediately, and would have proposed to her the next day, had
not a feeling of diffidence as to her sentiments deterred him for
nearly two weeks. At the end of that time, he told her--ah, well,
never mind what he told her! She, at least, will never forget the
passion of that claiming.

Amy Townsend had come to spend the winter in Mercer, with a cousin.
Of course, the first Sunday she went to St. James’s, as everybody
who was anybody did. When she came home, her eyes were keen with
interest.

“Do tell me about him, Cousin Kate,” she said. “I never heard that
sort of preaching; what does it mean? Is he a real person, or is he
just clever?” Mrs. Paul laughed.

“Wait till you meet him! you’ll see.”

But she also added to herself, “Wait till he meets you!” For Mrs.
Paul was one of those courageous women who rush in where angels
fear to tread; she was a match-maker.

“Is he married?” the girl asked, naturally enough; but blushed
furiously the next instant, which made her angry.

“No; but it is not for lack of opportunity,” said Mrs. Paul dryly.
“I declare, Amy, women are dreadful fools, sometimes! I should
think a clergyman wouldn’t marry, out of sheer disgust for their
silliness.”

“Oh, he’s run after, is he?” Miss Townsend said coldly.

“Well, I must admit he’s very attractive,” Mrs. Paul began,
remembering her scheme, and retreating a little,--for nothing will
put a girl against a man sooner than to know he is “run after.”

Then she told his story: the boy had been a waif. (“His mother was
respectable, I think,” said Mrs. Paul, “but nobody knows anything
about the father.”) He had had that dreariest sort of childhood
which knows no other home than an institution. Then, somehow,
“quite like a story-book,” Mrs. Paul said, a gentleman took an
interest in him, and began to help him in one way or another.

“It was that zoölogical man, Professor Wilson; you know who I
mean?” Mrs. Paul explained. “He looked after him. At first he put
him in a tinshop, if you please, as errand-boy,--fancy! this man
with the ‘grand manner.’”

“Oh, I supposed he was a gentleman,” Amy Townsend said.

“Amy, you are a snob,” her cousin answered hotly. “He is.”

Mrs. Paul was so annoyed that she ended the story of Mr. West’s
career very briefly. “Professor Wilson offered either to start him
in business or put him through college; he chose to go to college.”

“That was rather fine,” Miss Townsend agreed.

“Fine? It just showed what sort of a man he was!” cried Mrs. Paul.
“He worked his way to some extent; that is, he was Professor
Wilson’s secretary, and he did a lot of tutoring. Professor Wilson
left him a good deal of money, but he gave away nearly half of it
at once, John says. Quite remarkable for a young man. Well, that’s
all; you see what he is to-day--a gentleman and a scholar: John
says there is no man in Mercer who has the influence that he has.”

Miss Townsend, in spite of her careful indifference, was
interested. And later, when Rev. William West met her, he, too, was
“interested;” and all fell out as the most experienced romancer
could desire.

Amy had a little money, much charm, a certain distinction that
answered for beauty, and a very true nature; there was, perhaps, a
certain hard integrity about her, but her impulses were gracious.
Also, as the old ladies said, she was a “worker.” She found life
too interesting not to meddle with it.

So it had come to pass that these two, who, as Mrs. Paul said,
“were made for each other,” were going to be married.

“Just think, in two weeks!” he said, as they sat there under the
oak, the blossoming grass knee-deep about them, and the air sweet
with clover. “Amy, it does not seem as if I had been alive until
now.”

“I wonder, does it go on getting--nicer?” she asked him, a little
shyly; “everything seems to be better, and more worth while.”

“I understand,” he said.

And they were silent for awhile, because understanding is enough,
when people are in love. Then the girl’s gayety began to sparkle
out.

“Billy, Cousin Kate says if I’m not careful I’ll get to be a
managing Parsoness; she says I must devote myself to you, not to
your poor people.”

“Mrs. Paul has given a great deal of good advice in her day,” the
Rev. Billy remarked meditatively, “and I really think very little
harm has come from it.”

“She advised your being called to Mercer,” Amy retorted. “Did you
know that?”

“Know it? My dear child! how often have I dined at the Pauls’? Just
so often have I heard it.”

“Now, Billy, that’s not very nice in you.”

“I but stated a fact; and I have a high regard for Mrs. Paul. Only,
when I think how many girls she has tried to make marry me!--but
they would none of them look at me.”

“And in two weeks the opportunity will be gone,” she jeered.

“Poor girls!” the minister commiserated; and was reproved for
vanity. Indeed, just because happiness is so serious a thing, they
became very frivolous, these two, sitting watching the sunset,
and the river. Amy told him a funny story about the parish; he
responded by another concerning Tom Reilly, a policeman; which
reminded Amy to tell him that poor Tom had had an accident, and
hurt his hand.

“But it was very stupid in him,” she added, with a little of that
resentful goodness that one sees sometimes in women. “I’m not at
all sorry for him, because he deserved it. He had been drinking,
and as he went stumbling out of a car, he crushed his hand in the
door.”

Her lover was not to be lured into professional comments; he
only muttered, “_Mauvais quart d’heure_”--which made her say
indignantly: “Now, Billy, really, that is _too_ much!” and insist
that they should go home immediately. “I cannot descend to such
levels,” she told him; and was very stern and forbidding when,
looking to the right and left, and seeing no man, he begged to be
allowed to kiss her.

But this was all froth. Beneath, in the man’s life, were the great
tides of love, moving, noiseless and unchangeable, from out the
depths of his soul. In the girl’s life it was all shine and perfume
and glitter, like flowers blossoming on a rock; beneath, in her
heart, was the solid ground of reverence and faith.

The two weeks that were to pass before the day that was to be the
Day of Days were very full.

To get parish work ahead so that things would run themselves for
the month’s absence which had been granted the clergyman was
no small undertaking. William West was very busy, and a little
preoccupied in his endeavor to put his best thought, not upon his
own happiness, but upon committees, or Sunday-school matters, or
his assistant’s spiritual anxieties concerning his superior’s
indifference to the color of the lectern bookmarks; so it chanced
that he saw less of Amy than in the earlier part of their
engagement. He had but little time to think of her, and absolutely
no time to think of himself.

They were to be married on Thursday. Late Monday afternoon Mr.
West, with great timidity, ventured into Mrs. Paul’s drawing-room,
with the bold purpose of abstracting his sweetheart for a walk. The
project was, of course, promptly crushed.

“As though Amy had any time for that sort of thing!” said Mrs.
Paul. “Do you see those presents? She has got to acknowledge every
one of them! Amy, your cousin John and I will entertain Mr. West.
You can write your notes here, and let him look at you; that’s
quite enough for him.”

Amy smiled at him across a barricade of silver bric-à-brac.

“Billy thinks silver picture-frames and brushes and things are a
dreadful waste of money,” she said. “Just think how thankful you
ought to be, Billy, that I am making our manners for you; you
couldn’t say ‘Thank you,’ with truth.”

“Oh, truth,” said John Paul, lounging about the room, with his
hands in his pockets--“truth, my dear little cousin, is governed by
the law of benefit; didn’t you know that? If it makes the donors
feel happy, tell them West has longed for nothing in the world so
much as a silver glove buttoner. Now, if you told them the truth,
fancy the shock! Ask the Parson.”

“The Parson has no such base and cynical theory,” Miss Townsend
responded promptly; “have you, Billy? You don’t think truth is
governed by the law of benefit?”

“I think truth-telling is,” he assured her.

John Paul assumed that look of artless and simpering satisfaction
which one sees on the countenance of the unprotected male, who, in
the bosom of his family, finds himself indorsed by a higher power.

“There, Amy, what did I tell you? I had an instance of it
yesterday. I”

“Oh, here is a third asparagus fork,” murmured Amy; “what _shall_ I
say about it?”

“What’s your instance?” said the minister.

“Well, we’ve been looking for an assistant engineer, and there
have been the Lord only knows how many applicants. One fellow
impressed me very well; he seemed as straight as a string; honest
face, thoroughly decent-looking fellow. He was an Englishman, but
his references for three years were American. So much the better,
of course. I was going to engage him, when, bless my soul, if he
didn’t begin to stammer out something about having no references
from ‘Home’ (‘’ome,’ he called it), because he ‘’adn’t been over
steady,’ but he’d signed the pledge, and ‘he wasn’t afraid of drink
any more.’ I didn’t hire him. Now, I call that truth not governed
by the law of benefit.”

“You don’t discriminate between being truthful and telling the
truth,” said William West. “You hadn’t asked him if he had ever
drank. I don’t believe you lost much, in not engaging him, poor
fellow.”

“Oh, Billy, I think it was rather fine in him,” Amy protested,
looking up from her notes.

“I don’t see anything fine,” the minister said simply. “In the
first place, there was a lack of reserve, a lack of privacy, in
rushing into confession, which betrays the weak nature. There was
also self-consciousness, in dwelling on his sin. And in the third
place”--

“This sounds like a sermon: firstly--secondly”--Amy murmured,
signing her name to her thanks for the third asparagus fork.

--“in the third place, if the man has reformed, there was an
essential untruth in posing as a sinner.”

“Well, I don’t quite agree with that,” began Mrs. Paul.

“He’s right; he’s right,” John Paul declared. “I say, West, suppose
we went about confessing some of our college performances?” The
senior warden of St. James grinned, but his wife looked displeased.

“I don’t believe you ever did anything very bad, John; but if you
did, I think you should have confessed to me.”

“I stole some signs, Kate,” he told her; “can you forgive me?”

Amy, listening, smiling, said with that charming sidewise glance at
her lover: “Cousin Kate is quite right. I should never forgive a
man who didn’t tell me everything! Billy, come here and confess.
Have you ever done anything wicked?”

“We are all miserable sinners,” John Paul murmured. “I say so
publicly every Sunday”

“But you don’t specify!” the minister reminded him, with a laugh.

“Yes; but, Billy,” Amy Townsend insisted, “doesn’t it say somewhere
that ‘confession is good for the soul’?”

“Perhaps it is,” he said dryly, “but, generally speaking, it’s
mighty bad for the mind.”

There was an outcry at this from the two women.

“Of course,” Mrs. Paul said, “simply gossiping about one’s self
isn’t confession; but don’t you think, Mr. West, in the really deep
relations of life, between friend and friend, or husband and wife,
there should be no reserves?”

“My dear Mrs. Paul,” he answered, with quick gravity, “there must
be reserves--except with God. The human soul is solitary. But for
confession, that is different; justice and reparation sometimes
demand it; but, again, justice and courage sometimes forbid it.
Unless it is necessary, it is flabby vanity. That’s why I said it
was bad for the mind.”

“Well,” said Amy, with some spirit, “I don’t believe in taking
respect, or--or love, on false pretenses. If I had ever done any
dreadful thing, I should want to confess; good gracious, for the
mere comfort of it I should have to! It would be like walking on a
volcano to keep a secret.”

William West went over to the table where she was writing, and,
finding a place among the clutter of presents to lean his elbow,
sat down and looked at her with good-humored amusement.

“Where are you going to draw the line? How far back are you going
in confessing your sins? Please don’t tell me that you slapped your
nurse when you were three. It would be a horrible shock, and make
me very unhappy to discover such a crime.”

“I shall go all the way back,” said Amy, with decision; “if I had
done anything wrong, I mean very wrong, I should tell you,--if I
had only been a year old!”

The minister laughed. “A desperate villain of one year!” he said;
but as he spoke a puzzled look came into his eyes.

“I think,” Amy Townsend proceeded, “that honor and fairness demand
speaking out. And as for making some one else unhappy,” her voice
dropped a little, and the color came up into her face, “where
people love each other, they have a right to unhappiness.”

“Listen to Amy clamoring for unhappiness!” John Paul commented.
“Don’t worry, my child; you’ll get your share. There’s enough to go
round, I’ve noticed.”

Mrs. Paul laughed, but a note of reality had come into the careless
talk that gave her a sense of being a third party.

“John, you are flippant,” she said; “come, let’s leave these two
poor things alone; they’re dying to get rid of us. And besides, if
Amy is going to confess her sins since she was one year old, it
will take time.”

“That I consider a most uncalled for reference to my twenty-seven
years,” Amy retorted; “and besides, I’ve two more notes to write.”

“And I must go home,” William West said, rising in a preoccupied
manner.

“Why--but I thought you were going to stay to dinner!” Mrs. Paul
protested, with dismay.

“Oh, you must stay to dinner,” Amy urged.

But her lover was resolute. Nor did he, as usual, try to lure
her out into the hall that he might make his adieus. He said
good-night, stopped a moment to discuss with his senior warden
something about the appropriation for repairs at St. James, and
then, with a sober abstraction deepening in his face, went home
through the delicate June dusk, which was full of the scent of the
roses that grow behind the garden walls of the old-fashioned part
of Mercer.


The Rev. William West went into his study and shut the door. He
was a man who was always accessible to his people, yet his lips
tightened with impatience when he found a parishioner awaiting him,
and saw a pile of notes on his writing-table. But it was only for
an instant; he listened to the anxieties of his caller with that
concentration of sympathy which can put self aside; and when the
man went away it was with the other man’s heartfelt grip of the
hand, his heartfelt “I thank you for coming to me; God bless you,
my friend, and give you wisdom.”

The letters were not so easy; but he went through them faithfully,
answering them or filing them away: appeals for help, or money, or
work; two invitations; two letters from ladies of his congregation
about their souls; the unmarried and interesting clergyman knows
this sort of letter too well! He was aware of a sense of haste
in getting through with these things; a sense of haste even in
disposing of another caller, a boy, who came to say he had doubts
about the existence of God, and who felt immensely important in
consequence. “I tell you, Mr. West,” this youth declared, nodding
his head, “of course I don’t mean to be hard on the church; of
course I see the value of such a belief in keeping the masses
straight, but, for thinking men!” To treat this sort of thing
seriously and patiently is one of the trials of a thinking man who
happens to be a minister. Then the Tenor came to give his side of
the quarrel with the Bass, and the organist to say that quartette
and chorus were all fools.

One does not prove the existence of God, or pacify wounded artistic
feelings easily; it was nearly midnight before the clergyman had
his library to himself.

With a sigh of relief he shut the door, and walked once or twice
about the room, as though trying to shake off other people’s
affairs; then he bit off the end of a cigar, struck a match, and
sat down. He put his hands deep into his pockets, and stretched
his feet straight out in front of him.

“It must be five years since I’ve thought of it,” he said to
himself.

He held his lighted cigar between his fingers, his chin sunk on his
breast, his mouth set in that hard line which refuses to extenuate
or evade; his eyes narrowed with thought. Five years: Yes, the
memory had so faded and lessened that by and by it had ceased, and
now it was as though, as he walked along the level path of daily
life, a serpent suddenly lifted its evil head from the dust, and
struck at him, hissing.

“I was eighteen,” he said to himself; “no, nineteen. And now I’m
forty-two! Twenty-nine, thirty-nine--it’s twenty-three years ago.”

There is a hideous consciousness which comes to most of us men and
women at one time or another in our lives, of our inability to get
away from the past. From out of the “roaring loom of Time” comes
the fabric of our lives; white, run, perhaps, with a warp of silver
in our latter years; set, even, by the mercy of God, with deep
jewels of experience; spangled with golden threads of opportunity;
but back, in its beginnings--what stains, what rents! dragged
through what foul and primeval experiences of youth! Some, by
environment and temperament, have nothing to blush for but follies;
the joyous baseness of the young animal never broke through the
conditions of their lives, or the dullness of their minds. But for
most there are black spots from which, with wonder and disgust, the
adult turns away his eyes: the cruelty and impurity of childhood;
the ingratitude and meanness of youth. With the man, as with the
race, that is not first which is spiritual, but that which is
natural.

Twenty-three years ago: is there any connection between a fault
committed then and the William West of to-day? None! What has he in
common with the boy of nineteen? Nothing!

Suppose he told Amy, would she understand that? Why, the very fact
that he had forgotten it meant that he did not belong to it, nor
it to him. And yet he wanted to tell her!

William West got up with an impatient gesture. How absurd this
sort of mental posturing and agonizing was! What folly, to think
of burdening Amy with the miserable facts. Told now, twenty-three
years afterwards, their relation to his present life could not be
seen in true proportion. It would be an amazement and a shame to
her to think that her lover, her husband, had done thus and so.
Yet, it would not be her husband who was the sinner; it was that
poor, foolish, wicked boy of so many years ago; that boy upon
whom he looked back with the amazement and disgust of an outside
observer. What a curious untruth, then, in confessing it. He gave a
sigh of relief as he reached this conclusion; it was as if he had
stumbled for a moment, but had got his balance again.

But, in spite of himself, his mind crept back to the brink of
that black abyss of memory: those were dreadful days, those days
of repentance twenty years ago. The remembrance of his sin would
surge over him at the most unexpected moments--in the midst of
work or study; when he was talking; when he was praying; when,
perhaps, he was helping some other human creature stagger along
under a burden of remorse. The deeper he went into the new life
he had begun to lead--the clearer the heavenly vision grew before
his eyes--the blacker the sin seemed. For years, the memory of
it used to come over him with a sudden sinking and sickening of
the soul. He remembered how inescapable the torment of his regret
had been. There would be periods of forgetfulness, when he was
plunged into work, and life, because it was service, seemed good
and sweet; then, at some word, or the look of the sky, or the
smell of a flower--the evil spirit of recollection would leap upon
him and tear him. Yet the periods of forgetfulness had lengthened
and lengthened. The pain and shame had faded and faded. The thing
that gave him this sick feeling, as he sat here in his study at
midnight, was not the fact that he had sinned; it was the memory
of how he had suffered for his sin. The sin itself, now, was too
remote, too separate from himself for any more repentance; it had
ceased to be real. But the suffering!--he could not bear to think
of that.

“How mad this is!” he said to himself, with a curious terror lest
the old anguish should come back: the horror a man might feel who
sees the surgeon’s knife under which he has once agonized.

For very fear of memory, William West drove his thoughts back to
the question of his duty to Amy; that was plain reasoning, and had
nothing to do with this nightmare.

He lighted another match, but held it absently, until it scorched
his fingers, then flung it down with an angry exclamation. It
seemed as though the pain burned through all this fog of the past,
and showed him the facts which he must judge, and the folly of his
uncertainty. For, after all, what was this matter he was trying to
decide? Was it not merely the question of what was best for Amy,
not what was most comfortable for himself? It was that abstraction
called Honor, as applied to Amy’s happiness.

What was for her happiness, or, as he had put it first, what was
his duty to her? To let her know his past, or to keep a secret from
her, and allow her to suppose that she knew his life as she did her
own?

Admit that it was his impulse to tell her; what did that impulse
really mean? Primarily, that it would be a great relief to him;
the idea of having any reserves was most repugnant to him. For the
moment the instinct was again strong to tell her. But, frowning,
he went on with his argument: A relief to him; but what to her? A
pain and a shame; a memory that might outlast another twenty-three
years, perhaps. But she might want to know it? Well, that was no
reason. If she wanted poison, should he give it to her? And this
was poison. Did he not know that? Good God!

But she had a right to know it? Here he was perfectly clear;
certainly not. It in no wise bore upon his relation to her.
Furthermore, the question of prudence was not involved; there was
no chance that some day, somehow, it might come to her ears. She
could never hear it, except from him. If this were not the case, of
course he would tell her.

But was he deceiving her? Was he, as she put it, “taking her love
on false pretenses”? William West got up and walked the length of
his library; then he stopped by the open window, and looked out on
the silent street; a policeman on his beat glanced up and saw him,
and touched his helmet with two fingers.

“Good-evening, sir; don’t know but what I’d better say
good-morning!”

“What! Is it as late as all that, Reilly?” the minister said; and
added a friendly inquiry about the man’s hand, which seemed to be
hurt. Amy’s stern sense of the retributive justice of the accident
came into his mind, and he smiled involuntarily. The policeman
looked sheepish, as the clergyman meant he should, and turned the
conversation by remarking that he would “be lookin’ after the
rectory special when Mr. West was away on his weddin’ tower.”

“Thank you, Reilly!” the other answered heartily.

The policeman’s steps went echoing off into the night; a street
lamp flickered, and a puff of soft wind wandered into the window.

_Deceiving her: taking her love under false pretenses._

Was he anything but the man Amy supposed him to be? Very humbly,
very truly, he said to himself that, by the grace of God, he was
an honest, pure, God-fearing man. That sin of twenty-three years
ago was not his sin. He, William West, forty-two years old, whose
honorable record in the community was spread through all these
years of service, was not that base, mean, wicked boy. The sin was
not his. It was a sin of youth; a sin almost of childhood. It meant
nothing to him now.

“It is nothing now,” he insisted, passionately. Accustomed to
weigh other people’s actions and motives, he knew that he was
discriminating with almost judicial impartiality when he thus
looked himself in the face. “_A repentant man has no more to do
with his sin, for which he has repented and made reparation, than a
well man has to do with the disease of which he has been cured.”
He remembered that he had used this illustration once to some one
else; he must apply it now to himself. No; he was not deceiving
Amy. He was only sparing her sparing her, to be sure, from a
pain she might wish to bear, but that had nothing to do with the
question. If she knew, she would suffer; not from a fact, but from
an illusion; for he would be confessing a sin which was not his
sin. Honor? The word seemed artificial as he thus put the situation
before him.

No; it would be cowardly to tell her, and it would be untrue. There
was nothing for him to do but face the fact that, to spare her,
he must bear, for the rest of his life, the wretched burden of
realizing that he had a secret from her.

Sanely, truly, this good man believed that his impulse to tell the
woman he loved was selfish and cowardly; it was an impulse to make
her share a burden which he deserved to bear alone. Furthermore,
it was the effect, not of reason, not of religion, not of
love; it was the effect, first, of the selfish desire to seek
relief by sharing a cruel knowledge; secondly, of a traditional
sentimentality, the weak and driveling outcome of that sense of
justice which is expressed in the willingness to bear consequences.

Well, the boy who had sinned had borne the consequences; he had
suffered.

For the man to suffer now, twenty-three years after, was
unreasonable, but inevitable.

For a woman, who had no part or lot in that young past, to suffer
now, twenty-three years afterwards, was foolish and useless.

If the man permitted it, he was a coward and a fool.

This, at least, was what William West told himself.

